Well, this is Alord from Gaza.
We are really starving. Honestly, there
is nothing to be eaten here in Gaza. I'm
not eating anything.
We are losing too much weight for me.
Maybe I lost more than 10 kilos now. And
my bones, you can see my bones now. Soon
I'll be I'll be a skeleton.
It's very hard. I couldn't imagine in my
life that I'll be in this situation like
starving in 2025.
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
The suffering in Gaza has reached new
depths.
And now finding food, which was already
scarce, has become a deadly endeavor.
Israeli forces have opened fire on
crowds of desperate, hungry people who
are trying to access aid sites
established by a new and controversial
humanitarian group. Hundreds of people
have been killed according to Gaza
health officials.
Today, my colleague Aaron Boxerman on
who is behind the distribution system
and why it's been so deadly.
It's Thursday, July 24th.
[Music]
Aaron, welcome back to the show. It's
about 700 p.m. where you are in
Jerusalem, I think. So, we really
appreciate you making the time for us.
>> Always great to be here. So Erin, to
start, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza has obviously been dire since the
start of the war, but in recent weeks,
the situation seems to have deteriorated
even further. Specifically, we've been
hearing reports about hundreds of
Palestinians that have been killed by
the Israeli military while trying to
reach what limited aid has actually
gotten into Gaza. So, can you explain
what has been going on at these aid
sites and why have these people been
killed?
So, first of all, you're absolutely
right, Rachel. We've seen for many
months now that for many, many Gazins,
finding food and water has been an
endless daily struggle.
And the situation was really exacerbated
earlier this year when Israel put a
blockade on basically all food,
medicine, and fuel entering Gaza for
nearly 3 months.
Since then, the blockade was eased. aid
is going back into the Gaza Strip, but
the way that it's being distributed has
been totally upended.
>> And so, we're seeing a situation on the
ground that we haven't really seen
during the course of this nearly 2-year
war. In less than 2 months, hundreds of
Palestinians have been killed and
wounded near new aid distribution sites
that are under the control of the
Israeli military. and Palestinians in
Gaza who've spoken to us have described
how, you know, just getting a box of
food for themselves and their family has
become a life-threatening endeavor.
>> Do we know exactly how many people have
died?
>> All of these incidents are difficult to
assess from the outside. The Israeli
military doesn't allow international
journalists into Gaza so that we could
report and investigate these incidents
freely. But according to Gaza health
officials, over a thousand people have
been killed, more than 600 of them near
these new aid distribution sites.
Israeli officials have broadly disputed
those figures. They've suggested that
they're exaggerated,
but they also haven't provided any
alternative death toll.
>> So this new aid system, what about it is
resulting in all of these deaths?
So there's a number of factors and if we
want to understand the sort of new aid
system, we have to understand what it
replaced. So much of the international
aid that was entering the Gaza Strip
that was reaching its two million people
was going through a system coordinated
by the United Nations which ran or
coordinated a big network of hundreds of
sites across the Gaza Strip where aid
would be distributed to Gazins more or
less where they were. And Israel had
long been critical of that system.
>> Why? Israeli officials said that Hamas
was profiting off the existing system
>> either by diverting aid or by selling
aid. And they essentially said that as
the current aid system was set up, they
were essentially providing a lifeline to
Hamas. That these hundreds of trucks of
aid that were going in were undermining
Israel's ability to topple the
Palestinian armed group that had
launched the deadliest attack on its
civilians in Israeli history on October
7th. the attack that triggered the war.
>> Is that credible? The idea that Hamas
was basically seizing on this food, this
aid that was coming in.
>> As far as we know, there have been
incidents where, for example, gunmen
have hijacked aid convoys where they've
stolen bags of flour from aid trucks.
But it's really hard to tell whether
this is Hamas or other gangs. And then
there's the bigger question of whether
this is systemic, if it's happening on a
large scale. The United Nations says
that they haven't seen a lot of evidence
of that. And Israel as well hasn't
presented a lot of evidence publicly to
back up that claim.
>> And another reason that Israel was, you
know, sort of frustrated and skeptical
with the old UN dominated system was
long-standing tensions between Israel
and the UN. Many Israeli leaders have
called the United Nations biased and
there's a fundamental mistrust between
Israel and the United Nations about the
humanitarian situation as a whole.
>> Israel has consistently said that the UN
is exaggerating or is not correct or
saying that it's worse than it is.
Right.
>> Yeah. Israel has frequently said that UN
officials are distorting the reality on
the ground. At various points, Israeli
officials also said that there was no
widescale humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
even as UN officials and aid workers on
the ground were describing a very
different picture.
>> And so many of our listeners have
probably seen videos of people in need
of food in Gaza. You know, videos that
show crowds of hungry Gazins trying to
get aid. But Israel and the UN have been
at odds really throughout much of the
war about the nature and the depth of
the crisis in Gaza.
>> Mhm.
>> So we see that there are these
long-standing tensions between Israel
and the United Nations. And Israel
basically wanted to make a new aid
distribution system in a way that
officially was described as neutral and
independent.
>> So talk about that new system. Describe
it for us.
So earlier this year in the spring, we
started hearing about how Israel was
starting to brief the aid community.
They were starting to brief UN workers
and tell them there's going to be a huge
overhaul in terms of how aid is done in
Gaza. And then about a month later, we
started to understand that there was a
separate group that was going to be
involved that circumvented the United
Nations and that really circumvented
every existing aid organization that we
were aware of. It was going to be
carried out by a totally new
organization which had been established
seemingly for this purpose called the
Gaza Humanitarian Foundation. But who
was behind this organization? How was
this organization formed? All of that
was murky. There were not a lot of
public details about who and what and
how this organization was going to
function. And so my colleagues and I,
Patrick Kingsley, Natan Odenheimer, and
Ren Bergman began looking into it.
>> So what did you all find?
>> So what my colleagues found was that
even though the project was buil as
neutral and independent, it was actually
an Israeli creation. H
>> as far back as the earliest weeks of the
war, a whole host of people,
businessmen, tech people, military
officials, they all started meeting and
they came up with this plan that would
basically replace the aid system in Gaza
as we knew it to that point. And all
throughout 2024,
they lobbyed for the idea. They met with
Israeli leaders and they really built up
a coalition of support for the project.
Essentially,
the idea that they had was that private
contractors would distribute aid in
Gaza. These would be in areas that were
controlled by the Israeli military where
Israel would sort of be overseeing what
was going on even though Israel would
not be responsible for handing out the
aid.
>> And that would circumvent what Israeli
officials saw as a problematic United
Nations system and enable Israel to
exert more control over the flow of aid.
And eventually they decided that those
private companies would be American
ones.
>> American companies? Why American?
>> Well, it appears Israel didn't want this
to be a project that had an Israeli
face. So, they looked abroad for help.
The people behind the idea tried to
bring on board respected humanitarians
who would really provide legitimacy to
the project. The Israeli government even
reached out to the UN to see if they
would work under these new conditions.
But they, as well as much of the
international aid community, really
wanted nothing to do with this.
>> They said that working so closely with
Israel would compromise their
independence. And they were really
worried that the combination of Israeli
soldiers and crowds of Palestinians
desperate for aid would lead to
violence.
And so many of the people whose names
were floated to potentially help with
the project, including a former head of
the World Food Program, said no. But one
of the people they did manage to get was
someone named Jake Wood, who's a former
US Marine. He becomes the executive
director of the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation, which is a set up as a
nonprofit in the United States and which
basically serves as the public face of
the group and it raises funding to fund
the group's operations.
And it's not really clear who is
actually providing much of the funding
to this group.
>> We know that the US government has said
publicly that they've provided $30
million. The foundation has said that
they've received more than hund00
million from an unnamed European
country. But a lot about the group's
finances, a lot about how this group has
been operating is still very murky and
has not been disclosed to the public.
>> Do we have any sense about whether
Israel is providing any funding for it?
>> That's another big mystery. There's been
a lot of speculation about it, but at
the end of the day, we really don't know
for sure whether Israel has provided
financial backing. We know that they
support it, that they've advocated for
it, but in terms of financial backing,
we just don't know for sure yet.
>> I see.
>> So, the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation,
that's the public facing element, but
there's also the people that are really
carrying this out on the ground. That's
a different company. It's called Safe
Reach Solutions and it's run by Phil
Riley who's an ex CIA officer.
>> And under this system, Riley and the
contractors who work for him are
basically going to be the ones who are
overseeing security at the aid sites
themselves.
>> And what would that look like?
>> So really the idea was that there would
be four sites at least to start and they
would be in southern and central Gaza.
And that's a huge reduction. Remember
the UN had about 400 distribution sites
across the Gaza Strip.
These four new sites would be in areas
that are under Israeli military control.
So Palestinians, if they wanted to get
aid from the sites, would have to walk
through areas with armed Israeli
soldiers and only after that they would
arrive at these aid sites which were run
by American contractors. And again, that
was really one of the biggest issues for
the humanitarian community. What
specifically was the complaint or the
concern?
>> Well, they thought it was going to be
really dangerous basically. I mean, they
thought that gazins uh would have to
walk really long distances to get to
these places that there was going to be
huge amounts of crowding uh as desperate
people tried to get to a small number of
sites. And they were really worried
about the potential for Israeli soldiers
or contractors to use force to control
these large crowds of people arriving.
And another concern that the United
Nations and and other people raised
about this was that Israeli leaders at
the time were already suggesting that
they wanted to move a huge number of
Palestinians in Gaza from the north to
the south. And they worried that this
whole idea of creating a new aid system
was actually just a strategy for
forcibly displacing huge numbers of
Palestinians by ensuring that the only
place where they could get aid was going
to be in this very small area of
southern Gaza. And so they saw this as
not really an aid system, but as a
military strategy, as a way for the
Israeli military to sort of conveniently
hem off a large number of people in a
small area by using food essentially as
a way to keep people in a small part of
Gaza. And so there's been all this
criticism before the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation even opens its doors at the
end of May.
And just hours before it's set to start
distributing aid for the first time,
when Jake Wood, the organization's
public face, who defended it, then
resigns suddenly. In the middle of the
night, he puts out a statement which
says, "It is clear that it is not
possible to implement this plan while
also strictly adhering to the
humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality, and
independence, which I will not abandon.
[Music]
He essentially repeats many of the
criticisms which the United Nations and
which other people had made of the
foundation.
And this is really another blow to the
Gaza Humanitarian Foundation which was
set to open its first site for aid
distribution just hours later.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So Aaron, before the break, you talked
about how this new aid distribution
system launched despite what sounds like
a lot of criticism from many different
quarters. Talk to us about the early
days. How did the launch go?
So, it started in late May and it's been
difficult to really get a sense of
what's going on because Israel doesn't
allow us to freely move around in Gaza
and visit and see the sites for
ourselves in an independent way.
And so, my colleagues and I managed to
speak to several people who tried to get
aid from those sites during those first
few extremely chaotic days.
So, I got on the phone with a man named
Muhammad Sager. He's 43 years old. He
lives in a half-destroyed apartment in
the southern Gaza city of Kyunas with
his three kids and his mom.
And he went to one of the Gaza
Humanitarian Foundation sites on June
1st. So, that was just a few days after
it opened.
He told me that he learned that the site
was going to be open at 5:00 a.m. and he
wanted to get there as early as possible
so that he'd be at the front of the
line.
>> So, Muhammad told me that he left his
house in the middle of the night and
began walking to the distribution site
which is several kilometers away from
his house in
he arrived in the area at about 3:00 in
the morning. It was still dark and he
waited along with other people near the
distribution site inside the perimeter
controlled by the Israeli military.
[Music]
Everybody was pushing, you know,
pushing. They're trying to get forward.
A lot of Gazins, including Muhammad,
were worried that if they weren't at the
front of the line, there wouldn't be any
food left and they would have walked for
hours in the dark basically for nothing.
And then he said there was an
announcement from a drone basically
telling people to get back, but there
were so many people and basically nobody
could move back.
And then
he said he started hearing what he
described as warning shots, but the
crowd was still pressing forward.
And that's when, according to Muhammad,
people started getting shot and
everybody dropped to the ground out of
fear.
and he says there was an old woman next
to him who got shot in the leg.
>> He remembers someone yelling, "My
grandma, my grandma." But he says there
was basically nothing they could do.
People were just too scared to move, so
no one could help them.
And later the sun came up. It started to
grow light out.
He said he could see bodies from people
who had been shot. And despite all of
this,
Muhammad actually goes to the site. He
says that he ran as fast as he could. He
grabbed one of the boxes that was on the
floor and he tried to run away as
quickly as possible because he was
scared that after all of that that
somebody might attack him on the way
back and steal the food that he fought
so hard to get.
And he said the situation at the aid
site was a kind of race for food. It was
almost like, you know, everybody sort of
out for themselves, you know, everybody
racing each other to try to get a box of
food.
>> That's the level of chaos and
desperation that Muhammad said he saw.
[Music]
That is just a horrific story. What
details from it have you been able to
confirm? And what do we know about how
many people died that day?
>> It's absolutely a horrific story. And
when we heard stories, both Muhammad's
and stories like it, we try to verify
and confirm them as much as possible,
which is often difficult to do in Gaza.
But here's what we do know. We know that
on that morning, early on June 1st, the
Red Cross, which has a field hospital in
Rafa nearby, had a mass casualty influx
shortly after the shooting near the aid
site began.
>> Mhm. More than 170 people arrived. Most
of them had gunshot wounds or shrapnel
wounds. 21 of them were declared dead
upon arrival. And the patients who
survived, the wounded, said that they'd
been trying to reach an aid distribution
site.
So the Red Cross in its statement
doesn't say who shot them, but Muhammad
and other Palestinians we spoke to who
were there that day said that it was
Israeli soldiers.
Now, this was an extremely contested
incident. The Israeli military denied
shooting civilians near or at the aid
site, but an Israeli military official
later briefed reporters and told them
that Israeli troops had fired what the
official described as warning shots at
quote several suspects as the crowds of
Palestinians had approached them during
a period when the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation site wasn't open yet. Okay,
so that's what the Israeli military
said. What about the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation? What did they say?
>> The Gaza Humanitarian Foundation said
that it was unaware of any attacks in or
around its site, and that all the aid
was distributed between 5:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., which is when the site was
open. But according to Palestinian
witnesses and the Israeli military
official who spoke to reporters, the
incident seemed to have been about a
kilometer away from the site. And
>> today there was another deadly shooting
involving civilians at a food
distribution center in Gaza.
>> We've seen similar episodes recur.
>> Palestinian health officials say four
people were killed this morning at a
food distribution center in Gaza. Again,
>> medics and at least 38 Palestinians were
killed today in new shootings near food
distribution centers in
>> at least 49 people have been killed
while waiting for aid trucks across Gaza
over just 24 hours. According to
Palestinian health officials,
>> we've seen incidents where crowds of
Palestinians seeking aid from these
sites in southern Gaza have repeatedly
come under fire. At least eight people
have been killed in the last 24 hours
and 74 injured,
>> including as recently as this week.
>> 32 people are confirmed dead after they
tried to reach an aid site in southern
Gaza. This is according to Gazin
hospital officials.
>> Israeli troops say they've had to
control rowdy crowds trying to get to
these sites. The foundation says there's
been no violence in or near the sites
themselves.
Erin,
you mentioned that the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation only has four aid
distribution sites set up, and that's
compared with 400 sites that were in
place before this new system took over.
I think that everybody can understand
why crowded situations can be more
dangerous generally, but especially in a
place like Gaza.
But in these situations that we've been
talking about, people are actually
getting shot near these aid sites,
right? So, it it feels like there's
probably something else going on besides
simply that these sites are incredibly
crowded. You're absolutely right to
point to crowding as an issue. But
really, I think the fundamental problem
goes back to what the original critics,
you know, from the United Nations and
and from the aid community said at the
beginning, which is that thousands of
people are crossing Israeli military
lines in a war zone and they're going to
aid sites, which unlike in the past are
now surrounded by Israeli soldiers.
That is the deadly combination that
we've seen. Now, it's important to point
out the United Nations and other aid
organizations are still bringing some
aid into Gaza, and there have also been
some shootings linked to their
distribution,
but the majority of the deaths reported
by Gaza officials took place in the
vicinity of the Gaza Humanitarian
Foundation sites.
>> Obviously, live ammunition is not an
accepted form of crowd control. Has
Israel explained why this has happened
over and over again? At times they've
said that Israeli soldiers fired warning
shots at people who approached them and
who posed a kind of threat. They've also
basically disputed the casualty tolls
that come out of Gaza. They say that
casualties that are released by the Gaza
Health Ministry, which is a branch of
the Hamasun administration in the Gaza
Strip, are not reliable. And at times
they've accused people that have echoed
these, you know, reports of mass
casualties of distorting reality.
>> So it basically sounds like Israel is
denying that this is a huge issue.
>> So the Israeli military says that
they've learned lessons, that they're
working on renovating some of the sites,
that they're trying to ensure that
whatever incidents there have been don't
recur. But just last weekend, we've saw
two deadly incidents. One related to the
Gaza Humanitarian Foundation, another
related to the World Food Program convoy
where Israeli soldiers reportedly opened
fire, killing and wounding dozens of
people. And so, unfortunately, we've
seen these deadly shootings are
continuing.
>> Mhm.
>> The Gaza Humanitarian Foundation has
also rejected a lot of these reports,
but at the same time, they've said that
mostly they're speaking about what
happens at their sites or immediately
around their sites. So they're not
really commenting as much on what
happens to people on the way to the site
which is when you know at least in our
reporting when a lot of the deadly
shootings unfortunately have taken place
>> and what about the US in all of this has
the US said anything because as you
mentioned the US is providing at least a
chunk of funding to this effort. So the
US has emerged as a staunch defender of
the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation.
>> After Jake Wood, the former executive
director, left the initiative, they
brought in a new head, an evangelical
leader named Johnny Moore, who's seen as
quite close to President Trump. And in
fact, the $30 million in funding from
the State Department was actually
authorized weeks after these reports of
shootings began to emerge. So that
certainly feels like a real vote of
confidence in the new system even as the
Trump administration was actually
cutting foreign aid elsewhere in the
government.
>> Obviously this war has invited
international condemnation and I'm
curious whether we have heard from the
international community in response to
this effort specifically.
>> So it's been condemned by many including
Israel's own allies. You know, countries
that are historically supportive of
Israel like the United Kingdom and
Germany and France have expressed a lot
of skepticism about the Gaza
Humanitarian Foundation.
And just earlier this week, a coalition
of around 30 countries issued a joint
statement where they really condemned
this new system which they said deprived
Gazins of their human dignity. Have any
of those condemnations moved the needle
at all just in terms of Israel
acknowledging any kind of problem or
conceding that this aid distribution
system had issues that perhaps it didn't
earlier recognize? So publicly at least,
Israeli officials have defended the
initiative.
But there's also reason to believe that
they're not totally thrilled with how
it's turned out. After all, Israel
promised that this was going to be an
orderly system, not just for the sake of
gazins, but also because the whole
reason behind this overhaul was to
prevent the aid from going to Hamas or
benefiting Hamas. But the roll out has
been so messy and so disorganized that
it doesn't really seem like anyone is
checking who's coming to pick up these
boxes of aid.
So some officials and analysts have
suggested that even by the Israelis own
standards, it's not clear whether
they've been so successful,
but at the end of the day, this is all
really symptomatic of a much bigger
problem with Israel's whole approach to
Gaza.
>> How do you mean?
>> All these scenes of desperation and
chaos, they all really underscore that
right now, nobody is really responsible
for governing in Gaza. for providing for
the welfare of Gazins and for
instituting law and order. The Israeli
military has decimated the Hamas
government which used to run Gaza and it
hasn't allowed anything to come up in
its place. So the result has been
anarchy.
Now, this might be the result of bad
planning, but there are also critics of
Israel who have argued that for Israel,
the chaos in Gaza could also be part of
a larger strategy, either to further
weaken Hamas or just to make the
situation in Gaza so unlivable that
Palestinians might volunteer to leave on
their own.
[Music]
So, we're now nearly 2 years into this
war.
We're at almost 60,000 Palestinians
killed, according to Gaza health
officials. There's rising malnutrition.
The Israeli military now controls much
of the Gaza Strip, and ordinary Gazins
are still just trying to survive from
one day to the next.
>> Aaron, thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
On Wednesday, more than 100 aid agencies
and human rights groups, including Save
the Children and Doctors Without
Borders, warned that quote, "Mass
starvation was spreading across Gaza."
The joint statement adds to growing
calls for Israel to lift restrictions on
humanitarian aid and for the war to end.
Israel's foreign ministry rejected the
group's claims, saying that the
organizations were echoing Hamas talking
points.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, Columbia University has agreed to
pay a $200 million fine to settle
allegations from the Trump
administration that it failed to do
enough to stop the harassment of Jewish
students. The settlement is part of a
sweeping deal to restore the
university's federal research funding,
which the White House had canled.
Colombia had been the earliest target of
the Trump administration's efforts to
overhaul the country's most elite
academic institutions.
As part of the settlement, the
university also agreed to a number of
different terms, including the
appointment of a provost to oversee
Middle Eastern studies and the
appointment of three dozen public safety
officers with arrest powers.
And on Wednesday, a judge sentenced
Brian Cobberger, who was convicted of
killing four Idaho college students in
2022, to life in prison with no chance
of parole. Friends and family members of
the victims spoke of their loss with one
telling the killer to quote go to hell.
Others demanded to know why he had
committed his crimes. Mr. Coberger
declined to speak or explain his
motives.
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tennisketer, Relle Bonja, and Mooch
Zadi. It was edited by Maria Burn with
help from Paige Cowat and Ben Calhoun.
Fact checked by Susan Lee, contains
original music by Dan Powell and Pat
McCusker, and was engineered by Chris
Wood. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg
and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]